Acting dean for a year and then Mews is hired as the
dean and you are the associate dean. Associate
dean for graduate programs and research.
Alright, by then how big was the business program?
It's growing. Yeah, it's huge by then. It's now
getting ready to get the blocker, well the next,
the year following it gets, well as a matter of fact
they moved in right after I replaced you. So I
stayed until I guess May as associate dean or
April, but I remember once they decided I was to do
it. You left early as I recall, didn't you? July 1. I
thought you left earlier than that. July 1, 1970. I
mean 1980, excuse me. Well, in any event, I guess I
was supposed to serve until the end of August, and I
left. Originally, it was going to be August, and I
said, no, let me get out there and get my feet on the
ground. Which is a good thing to do. If I had to do it
over again, I'd do it the same way. Mews had been a
department head. And dean of a little college in
West Virginia. And then came here. You chaired the
committee. Yes, yes. I was on it. Describe him as
dean. He did a good job. He sat down with every
member of the faculty, came in early as I recall,
and did that.
did start planning for further growth and
particularly quality growth. I think he
instituted a number of procedures that got other
people's attention because not too long after he
was made a deputy chancellor. Were there any key
decisions you recall that really helped to
determine the growth and progress of business
under in those years i think the i don't remember
key decisions i remember uh that we had some pretty
good department heads and the money was flowing
and um enrollment was skyrocketing and
enrollment was women were flocking into
particularly accounting. Even then, close to
half of the enrollees in the accounting program
were females. So, of course, there's no question
but what the role of females on this campus made a
major difference. Can you give any examples that
you recall of the real world out there showing
their acceptance of the progress of A&M? Do you
remember any businesses changing their policy
about hiring A&M people or anything? Well, first
of all, in past years not necessarily from the
business program but from the college petroleum
engineering people and so forth had succeeded to
pretty important positions presidencies in many
cases and uh... people like bill adams and before
him bill eckles worked hard at developing the
Aggie ties with these people for the executive
development program. So I think the executive
development program played a non-trivial role
and getting business people on campus. And you
know this as well as I do, when they hit the campus
they just awed by the quality, the character of the
students, the friendliness of the place. And of
course this was during the Vietnam War times and
there weren't major uprisings on our campus. We
were the model from a conservative businessman's
point of view. We were the model of decorum. The
story was that the only time the students marched
on the president's house, on Jack Williams'
house, was for some. I think to welcome him. To
welcome him, yeah, that was right. Describe Bill
Mews as dean, his manner, his style.
He was a leader. It was pretty clear that he was a
leader, but he was a democratic leader. He got
input and basically, I felt really part of the
program for the 10 months or 11 months that I was his
associate dean. He was innovative. He came out of
marketing. And so he knew what he needed to do in
terms of, I think he really did do a pretty good job
of marketing the program nationally. I'm sure he
was effective when he went to meetings such as the
AACSB's meetings, national meetings. He was an
effective recruiter. Did we have, did you all have
a business program somewhere else that you kind of
used as a model?
Was there any school or schools trying to follow
that pattern?
No, I can't remember that we really did. It would be
worth asking Bill about if he did. I was only in for a
year, what I did try to do was get some order out of
what I thought was kind of not the best way, from my
point of view, handling determining salaries and
things like that for department heads. I had the
whole department head group sit down and review
all of our salaries.
So you were associate dean for a year and then back
to the department, or did you stay back to the
department? Well, no, sorry. I was selected to be
dean of faculties from there. Forgot about it.
Review for me the process, that selection
process. Well, I debated hemmed and hawed about
whether I would even put my name in the pot. Chuck
called me and asked me to do it. McCandless.
McCandless, yeah, and I did. And I ended up being
one of the finalists. There were three, I guess.
Stewart in English, I think.
What's his name in physics, whose wife Carolyn
Adair. Tom Adair. I think he might have been. For
whatever reason, I got selected. And how did you
learn you'd been selected? Did you get a letter or a
phone call? I was asked to come over and see Mac
Prescott. Okay. And so you took over in summer of
80, and
this was- Within a month or two, Jarvis Miller was
gone. Right. How did you hear that news? Ah, you've
probably heard the story. Hubert had started
these programs, it's not quite the right word,
events where the board, after its board meeting,
would go somewhere and meet the faculty and staff
of colleges. We and architecture were at the
Ramada Inn, and what's his name from? Tyler came
marching in and said, why don't we fire your
president?
This was said to the first people who happened to
see him as he came in. And you talk about a grass fire
on a prairie, I mean it just swept through the place
like Nobody, I don't think anybody, well, I
didn't, certainly had no clue that this was going
on. I didn't either, and I had left the day before to
drive to, that was a Wednesday, and my wife and I had
had lunch with Ken and Ann Pierce, veterinary
medicine, old Presbyterian friends, and we left
Tuesday after lunch, spent the night in Fort
Stockton, got to El Paso Wednesday night, went to
the president's house to look more carefully at
what it was going to be like. And we got to our motel
at 1030 Mountain Time, and there was a note there
saying, urgent call Dr. Prescott at President
Miller's house. And I asked the clerk, and she said
the phone call had come at 730 Mountain Time. So it
was then three hours later. My wife said, are you
going to call? And I said, no, it's too late. It's
1130 there. Whatever's done is done. what do you
think happened? Well, I have no idea. But I said,
this is not Mac Prescott calling to say good luck.
We're wishing you well. I said, this is serious.
Yeah, it's like a death or something. And I said,
perhaps one of the Miller daughters had an
accident. Who knows? But then, in attempted
humor, I said, the board's there. Anything's
possible. By 8 o'clock, By 7 o'clock Mountain
Time, 8 o'clock Central Time, I'd had calls from
three different newspaper reporters who found me
out there asking for my comment on what had
happened, and I didn't, until they told me, I
didn't know what had happened. What was the
general reaction of? Well, a shock.
Most, I don't know how Dean's, generally reacted
to
how Jarvis Miller functioned as a president. I was
not impressed myself, particularly he had a
lieutenant who was a political hack. I can't
remember his name. Steve Pringle. Pringle. I mean
you thought you were talking to a... How did, do you
remember any of Mack's first Well, Mack, I think,
was appalled. I think he was. Yeah. Because they
were pretty close. Yes. And, all right, then Chuck
Sampson's appointment as interim was announced
almost immediately? Yeah. In fact, I think maybe
that night. I'm not sure. But soon thereafter. All
right. When did – how soon – did Jarvis vacate the
office and Chuck occupied?
Boy, I think it was very quickly. As I recall,
Jarvis Miller, well, after the event, when he knew
he was fired, he sent notes to everybody but,
what's his name? Weisenbaker. Weisenbaker. And I
don't know that he came back to the office much
except to clean out the desk. I really don't know.
Did Mr. Weisenbaker in small talk over there give
any justification or reason or explanation? I
never talked to him over there. I've never heard. I
just heard it all hearsay. He just said he was
fired. I understand through very indirect word of
mouth that when they... confronted Jarvis with
what they had done, that one of them supposedly
said, you refused to shake hands with an A&M
graduate. Well, I was seated about three feet from
where that happened on the stage at the spring
commencement, and when we got into the
letterman's lounge where we put on our caps and
gowns and so forth, I overheard a number of the
board members saying, damn right, serves her
right, I wouldn't have shaken hands with her
either. I didn't remember anybody that day saying
that that was bad. I'm trying to remember. I was
there too. Yes, you were. Because I remember. We
were both on stage. I remember Jarvis. walking
toward Mack's back and doing this, or something
like that, and Mack had to go up and take his place.
And I'm trying to remember if there was a gasp in the
audience or not. There were a few people kind of
going, like,
Chuck took over. Did he do, did he have any key
meetings with you, key people in the first weeks?
He continued the Jarvis Miller breakfast, which
were what, once a month? I think so. Yeah, although
we backed off from the steak and eggs and
everything and got down to cereal and toast and
whatnot. Were there still once-a-week
APC meetings? Yes. Of course, those were presided
over by Mack. Yes, yes. All right, now describe,
make believe that I didn't know Mack's style of
leadership. Describe Mack Prescott as a chief
academic officer.
Well, you knew where he stood. I don't need to say
that. I thought he presided well. I mean, he was
crisp, and we took business in order, and I was
impressed. I liked Mack. What were his, did he have
any pet peeves, foibles? Oh, he would, he got upset
over, not really upset, but he could get concerned
about... a faculty member who kind of went off the
deep end on something or other. But he, you know, he
took it in his stride. I enjoyed the the little
meetings that we had with him which now of course
have grown into health conventions and there's no
longer the intimacy and decision making that was
really a pleasure in the early years. Oh I can
remember when you talk about being upset when he
had to trot over to justify the budget with Chuck
Sampson and the picky little green eye shaded
people were allowed to climb all over this, that,
or the other little thing. Mack said he almost went
over the table after, who was that jerk that was,
have to take that out, that person who was an
assistant chancellor over there.
Ah. I think he's finally retired. I don't know.
Anyway, but he would ask about a secretary's
salary. Talk about picky eunuch. Petty.
Did you notice any changes in direction or
emphases?
Did anybody under Sampson? No. Not really. I think
he was really a caretaker. Every night he would go
out with two big briefcases full of stuff, put them
in the trunk of the Cadillac, and drive home. The
next morning it would take these. Presumably he'd
signed his name all night long or something. Now,
he quickly occupied the office in the Koch
building. that Jarvis had offered. Okay. And now
you served from 1980 to 19 what? Ninety. Ninety. So
you served ten years as dean of faculties. During
that period,
who were the presidents? Will Sampson, of course,
was replaced by Vandiver. And although he was off
the wall, sometimes he was fun to work with. Then
who followed him? And he was followed by...
Mobley? Mobley. Okay. Alright, let's talk about
Vandiver. How did you and others become aware that
Vandiver was under consideration? From Ed
Cooper. who plotted where the airplane went.
This may have been an after, something we learned
afterwards, but he did know that the plane went up
to Denton, the University plane with Regents on
it.
And it happened pretty quickly, as I recall. It
wasn't much time wasted. Because didn't the board
say that they would have a president by September
the 1st? Yeah, and they did. Were you and others
aware of whether or not Sampson was even
considered for the job permanently? No. There
were people who were very upset that he wasn't, but
I certainly wasn't one of them. I've not heard of
whether he was or wasn't. He was a very nice man.
Yes. But I imagine he was sort of a Peter Principle
thing. He probably did a good job as head of civil
engineering. Well, see, and he wasn't even head of
civil engineering at the time he was born. No. No,
he wasn't. All right. Do you remember how you all
heard that Vandiver was officially the new
president? No, I don't. I guess it must have been a
phone call to Mack. Describe your first
impression of him. Of Vandiver? Vandiver. Well, I
liked him. He's a jovial guy. Very soon, though, he
did exhibit some rather strange behavior. Such
as? Such as? going out on a pistol range and firing a
pistol. I seem to remember that he wanted a license
to carry a gun. He had a bodyguard under
consideration. I saw somebody walk in that might
have been that person. So there were things that he
did that were unusual. He would keep people
waiting for an hour. But there were other things he
did that were just a hoot. I mean, he'd walk into my
office reading something, and he'd sit there and
read something to me for a half hour that he thought
it was funny, and we'd chat. He didn't care what his
schedule was. He couldn't care less about mine. Or
he'd call me in. You know, Mobley never walked into
my office in all the time, and he was just across the
hall until he moved over to the tower. Mm-hmm. I
don't know how many times Frank walked into my
office or called me into his or I wandered into his.
As you worked with Vandiver, did you develop any
understanding of any unwritten rules or
guidelines in succeeding with him?
I learned fairly early on that
He wasn't into management principles and that
sort of thing. I remember once he jumped on poor
Howard Vestal, who was coming up with a proposal to
have us all learn more about control procedures or
something. I don't remember what. I liked Howard
very much, by the way, and I know Mac did. And
Vannevar did too, but I guess. But that was one
foible he had. I admired the man tremendously for
pushing ahead on things like the Senate, when,
boy, there were folks in agriculture
particularly that were dead set against that kind
of thing. All right, let me turn the question then.
What were his greatest strengths? and his
greatest weaknesses?
Well his greatest strengths I think were that he
knew what a real university is about.
He was really on to getting us off the AAUP list and
he worked hard to do that. He wanted us to have Phi
Beta Kappa and he tried that. He encouraged the
creation of the Senate, as I said, even though, as
he said, there'll be days when I'll hate myself for
doing this in the spite of opposition. He was
masterful at going over and testifying before a
committee in Austin. They'd ask him some question
and we'd look at it and go, How is he going to answer
that? How would he know what the answer is? He would
come out with a flawless answer, and after we
checked it out, you know, it was pretty close to the
truth. He was a genius at that. He really handled
people well. He was good at that. But he always kept
his eye on what he should be doing. I liked him when I
would go ask him for money for proposals. I
remember I wanted to see an expansion of the
academic study leaves. There were, what, five or
six in those early days, so one year as low as four,
and the formula over in Austin was never going to be
implemented. So anyway, I put together a
proposal, I guess about eighty-two, three, four,
somewhere in requesting a significant sum of
money from the former students and routed it with
his. I had his permission to do it, of course. It
went over, and the year that it was decided was the
year that Ed Davis was the ex-president of the
former students. What they decided to do was that
they would come up with, I've forgotten how many
thousands of dollars, if we would match the money.
And Hed Davis a couple days later ran into me and he
said, I thought maybe you'd want to shoot me. And I
said, oh my God, Hed, you did the best thing I could
ever imagine. Well, anyway, so he got enough to do
15 or 18, depending upon the level of his salary.
And I was really pleased with that. But that was
something that he really went to bat for. He went to
bat for minority hiring. Oh. there was a period of
time when we put up all the money for a minority
hire. And then when we started splitting it as a
cost saving, when Mobley came in, we split the cost
with the college and had to bring in very many. That
was always a tough thing to do, to recruit
intellectual blacks into a community where
there's a relatively small intellectual
community. Fred McClure was the first one who told
me that as a student, that we didn't have enough
black professionals here for the new black
faculty member or staff member to find off-campus
friends in a black community? I'm trying to think
of her name. It was assistant to Frank Black, who
said if she wanted to go to a black church where she
felt comfortable, she'd have to go to Houston,
where she's now vice president, I guess, still, at
the University of Houston. Alright, Vandiver, we
talked about his strengths, let's go to the other
extreme. Weaknesses, well some of the wacky
things that he did were.
He forgot to go to Muster the first year I remember.
Oh yeah, leading the band I guess at Rice.
You know, he had a great sense of humor, and he
thought people would think it was clever. Well,
maybe he never really understood old Ags too well.
Standing people up for meetings, and sometimes
he'd show up, sometimes he wouldn't. Sometimes he
said things that were preposterous, like, he
tried to catch an airplane in the Houston and he
just missed it and we figured how long it would take
him to get there without even stopping and turning
around and coming back and he couldn't have done
it. I may take this out afterwards but overall the
place moved under him. Now he and Hubert had been
acquainted for a while. Hubert's son had been in
Vandiver's classes at Rice and so forth. After
Hubert retired, did Vandiver's relation with the
system change that you knew of? No, I wouldn't know
really. I thought that he and,
oh, who succeeded Hubert? Art Hanson. I thought he
got along well with Art Hanson. He's got some
things settled like if if one person owned only 13%
of a faculty member's salary, he couldn't dictate
the salary increase as one person tried to do in
agriculture. And you know who. Anyway, they got an
agreement. Whoever had the biggest percentage.
Now, Prescott continued as the Chief Academic
Officer under Vandiver. For a year, I guess. Okay.
Maybe two. Okay. And then he retired, and who took
over? Then Gordon Eaton. Gordon Eaton, who had
been Dean of Geosciences. And only a year or so.
Okay. What triggered Gordon's being selected, I
think? There were two searches. I chaired both of
them. The first one failed. The second one,
Gordon by then had been there a year and he was
really impressive. And Vandiver had decided, oh
by this time we'd also, the head of the former
students association had dumped a whole bunch of
money on us for teaching only awards so that they
would be far greater than the research awards. And
we plotted to get those transferred to $1,000
awards and spread among all the colleges.
I like to think it was my idea, but I don't know. I
can't remember whether it was or not. But anyway,
it turned out to be a good one. They agreed to it. And
so these awards would go on at each college. And
Vandiver went to the one at Geosciences And Gordon
had already prepared his remarks, so he wasn't
saying something because Frank was there. And
Gordon was explaining what the administration
was doing to the four and to the faculty, why things
were happening. Frank was immensely impressed,
because typically, I mean, you get a guy like, I
won't mention any names, but some would openly
deride the administration Not me, because I was
always sitting there. I went to all these
meetings. You know, they might, or they wouldn't
say anything. More than likely, they wouldn't say
anything. But he went out of his way to explain
what's going on in the head shed, as he used to call
it. And I thought that was impressive. So did
Frank. And they got along well together. All
right, so you worked with Eaton for? For four
years, I guess, three or four years. They were the
best years. All right, describe his style. He was
laid-back, uh,